# Truth Tables

[TRUTH TABLES - DISCRETE MATHEMATICS](youtube://UiGu57JzLkE)

[tag:Truth table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_table) is a tool that
allows us to represent all possible values of a logical statement in a visual
manner.

[tag.essential:Boolean algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra)
is the branch of algebra that deals with the **logical operations** and
**truth-values**.

## Negation (NOT)

For instance, taking a logical statement $\neg P$ it is possible to
build a truth table for
[tag:negation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negation):

|  $P$  | $\neg P$ |
| :---: | :------: |
| False |   True   |
| True  |  False   |

In this table, the first column shows all the possible **input** values, while
the second column contains the **answers** for each possible input.
The same procedure can be carried out for all other
[tag.essential:logical operators](/part/1/section/4?id=symbolizing-operators).

<!-- To make the table more succinct we can use numbers `1` and `0` instead of
`False` and `True`. -->

> **NOTE**: Negation is the only logical operator with a single input - it is
> also called a
> [tag.essential:unary operator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unary_operation)
> while all other logical operators are
> [tag.essential:binary operators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_operation).

Given the formula $\neg P$ you can write a program to calculate its value.

Try running the following program by clicking `Run`:

```python:editor
P = True
print(not P)
```

<style>
    #negation-not + * + .table-wrapper table tr > :last-of-type,
    #conjunction-and + * + .table-wrapper table tr > :last-of-type,
    #disjunction-or + * + .table-wrapper table tr > :last-of-type,
    #implication-if-then + * + .table-wrapper table tr > :last-of-type,
    #equivalence + * + .table-wrapper table tr > :last-of-type,
    #exclusive-or-xor + * + .table-wrapper table tr > :last-of-type {
        border-left: 2px solid var(--table-cell-border-color);
    }
</style>

After the program has been ran you should see the output console saying `False`
which is in accordance with the truth table for the **negation** operation.

Obviously negation truth table is very simple, but this simplicity is at the
core of **all logical statements** that computer deals with. Truth tables begin
to really shine when you need to analyze more complex statements.

## Conjunction (AND)

[tag:Conjunction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_conjunction)
(logical `and`) is a
[binary operation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_operation) and therefore
needs **two inputs**. In order to calculate all possible values of the operation
you write down **all possible combinations** of the inputs on the left and then
evaluate them in the column on the right.

|  $P$  |  $Q$  | $P \land Q$ |
| :---: | :---: | :---------: |
| False | False |    False    |
| False | True  |    False    |
| True  | False |    False    |
| True  | True  |    True     |

<style>
    #conjunction-and + * + .table-wrapper table tbody tr:nth-of-type(4) {
        border-right: 2px solid var(--primary-color);
    }
</style>

Given the formula $P \land Q$ you can write a program to calculate its value.

> Try changing the values of $P$ and $Q$!
>
> **NOTE**: `True` and `False` **must** start with a capital letter in order for
> the program to run correctly.

```python:editor
P = True
Q = False
print(P and Q)
```

> **TIP**: You can also press `Ctrl`+`Shift`+`Enter` to run the program.

## Disjunction (OR)

We can do the same for the
[tag:disjunction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_disjunction)
(logical `or`) which is also a binary operation:

|  $P$  |  $Q$  | $P \lor Q$ |
| :---: | :---: | :--------: |
| False | False |    True    |
| False | True  |    True    |
| True  | False |    True    |
| True  | True  |   False    |

<style>
    #disjunction-or + * + .table-wrapper table tbody tr:not(:nth-of-type(4)) {
        border-right: 2px solid var(--primary-color);
    }
</style>

Now try to tweak the program for the formula $P \lor Q$ and see how it changes:

```python:editor
P = True
Q = False
print(P or Q)
```

## Equivalence

[tag:Equivalence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/If_and_only_if)
is `True` when $P$ is equal to $Q$:

|  $P$  |  $Q$  | $P \equiv Q$ |
| :---: | :---: | :----------: |
| False | False |     True     |
| False | True  |    False     |
| True  | False |    False     |
| True  | True  |     True     |

<style>
    #equivalence + * + .table-wrapper table tbody tr:first-of-type,
    #equivalence + * + .table-wrapper table tbody tr:last-of-type {
        border-right: 2px solid var(--primary-color);
    }
</style>

The formula $P \equiv Q$ can be rewritten as
$(\overline{P} \land \overline{Q}) \lor (P \land Q)$. Here the line over a
variable is [negation](/part/1/section/4?id=symbolizing-operators).

> Note the braces that show operator priority explicitly.

```python:editor
P = True
Q = False
print( (not P and not Q) or (P and Q) )
```

## Exclusive OR (XOR)

[tag:Exclusive OR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exclusive_or)
is `True` when $P$ is **not** equal to $Q$:

|  $P$  |  $Q$  | $P \oplus Q$ |
| :---: | :---: | :----------: |
| False | False |    False     |
| False | True  |     True     |
| True  | False |     True     |
| True  | True  |    False     |

<style>
    #exclusive-or-xor + * + .table-wrapper table tbody tr:not(:first-of-type):not(:last-of-type) {
        border-right: 2px solid var(--primary-color);
    }
</style>

Exclusive OR is a negation of the equivalence:
$P \oplus Q = \overline{P \equiv Q} = (P \lor Q) \land \overline{(P \land Q)}$

It can be read as: "`True` when either P or Q is `True`, but not when both are
`True`"

```python:editor
P = True
Q = False
print( (P or Q) and not (P and Q) )
```

## Implication (If, Then)

[tag:Implication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Material_conditional)
is `True` unless $P$ is `True` and $Q$ is `False`:

|  $P$  |  $Q$  | $P \rightarrow Q$ |
| :---: | :---: | :---------------: |
| False | False |       True        |
| False | True  |       True        |
| True  | False |       False       |
| True  | True  |       True        |

<style>
    #implication-if-then + * + .table-wrapper table tbody tr:not(:nth-of-type(3)) {
        border-right: 2px solid var(--primary-color);
    }
</style>

Implication is considered a compound operation since it can be constructed from
the basic operations such as `and`, `or` and `not`. The formula
$P \rightarrow Q$ can be rewritten as $\neg P \lor Q$:

```python:editor
P = True
Q = False
print( not P or Q )
```

## Intuition

You can notice that the truth-values on the left of each table follow a specific
pattern:

| Input 1 | Input 2 |
| :-----: | :-----: |
|    F    |    F    |
|    F    |    T    |
|    T    |    F    |
|    T    |    T    |

It might become easier to spot the pattern visually if we replace truth-values
`T` and `F` with the numbers `1` and `0` correspondingly:

| Input 1 | Input 2 |
| :-----: | :-----: |
|    0    |    0    |
|    0    |    1    |
|    1    |    0    |
|    1    |    1    |

You can see that the **total count** of ones and zeros in both columns is **the
same**, but their positions differ. In fact the right column repeats twice as
frequently as the left one!

Taking this one step further, imagine we had three inputs. Then we would have a
table like this:

| Input 1 | Input 2 | Input 3 |
| :-----: | :-----: | :-----: |
|    0    |    0    |    0    |
|    0    |    0    |    1    |
|    0    |    1    |    0    |
|    0    |    1    |    1    |
|    1    |    0    |    0    |
|    1    |    0    |    1    |
|    1    |    1    |    0    |
|    1    |    1    |    1    |

<style>
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(4),
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(2) td:not(:first-of-type),
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(6) td:not(:first-of-type),
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(1) td:last-of-type,
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(3) td:last-of-type,
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(5) td:last-of-type,
    .table-wrapper:nth-child(60) table tbody tr:nth-of-type(7) td:last-of-type {
        border-bottom: 2px solid var(--primary-color);
    }
</style>

You can see that the table starts to look a bit like a
[tag:fractal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fractal), where the big table
contains several small tables which, in turn, contain even smaller tables.
In fact, each added input makes the number of all possible combinations two
times greater:
- 2 rows for 1 input
- 4 rows for 2 inputs
- 8 rows for 3 inputs
- and so on

Here you can see a clear pattern that the number of rows equals 2 multiplied by
2 for each additional input added. If you are familiar with
[exponentiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponentiation)
you can express this relation as $N_{rows} = 2^n$, where $n$ is the number of
inputs.

## Learn Further

In this section we have covered truth tables for the basic logical operations.
However, in order to become confindent with complex logical expressions and be
able to define your own
[tag:boolean functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_function)
using truth tables you must also know how to convert any arbitrary logical
expression to a truth table and vice-versa. Since it is extra material, it has
been extracted into appendices to this section:

- Appendix 1: [Converting Logical Expressions to Truth Tables](/part/1/section/5/appendix/1)
- Appendix 2: [Converting Truth Tables to Logical Expressions](/part/1/section/5/appendix/2)
- Appendix 3: [De Morgan's laws](/part/1/section/5/appendix/3)

---

> **<i class="fa fa-star"></i> Your first programming experience!**
>
> Now you know the basics of logic `AND` you have ran (and hopefully tinkered
> with) your first computer programs! If you have come this far - take a moment
> to be proud of what you have accomplished so far.
>
> What you have learned already is the basis of all computers that surround us,
> so by understanding these concepts once you automatically know how all of the
> programs on all computers around us work, albeit without technical details
> (yet).

#### References

[^Video 1]: TrevTutor. _TRUTH TABLES - DISCRETE MATHEMATICS_
[tag.image/youtube:Open Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UiGu57JzLkE)
