# Encoding Information

[tag:Code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code)
is a system of rules to convert signals into another form for communication
through a
[tag:transmission medium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_medium)
or storage in a
[tag:storage medium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_storage).
The process of **encoding** (*verb*) converts information from a source into
symbols for communication or storage. **Decoding** is the reverse process,
converting code symbols back into a form that the recipient understands[^1].

[Information Theory part 3: What is coding theory?](youtube://4G8U5mpdGWM)

## What is Encoding

The process of **associating** information *(knowledge about something)*
to **symbol** is called **coding**.

In fact, anytime you speak to someone you encode your **thoughts** into spoken
language (i.e. English). In this case the language you use is the **encoding**
(*noun*) that is used to transfer information. Since both of you can speak
the same language you are able to understand each other.

Now suppose you want to say something to a friend in a very **noisy** area (i.e.
a rock concert). In this case you cannot speak to a person, since they won't be
able to hear you, however you still can **communicate** with each other by
showing gestures with your hands. You can encode the **same information** in a
different way.

> You can create different ways of sending `signals` to overcome the `noise`.

## Discrete Source

You can think of each pluck as a **signal**

Multiple plucks one after another is a **symbol** that conveys the meaning -
number on the die

There are a finite number of possible messages

## Transmitting Information

![
    title: Great Wall of China
    source:
        name: Jakub Hałun
        url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:20090529_Great_Wall_8219.jpg
](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/33/20090529_Great_Wall_8219.jpg)

Passing messages by signalling over distance goes as far as to the ancient
times. One of the oldest examples is the signal towers of the Great Wall of
China. In 400 BC, signals could be sent by beacon fires or drum beats. By 200 BC
complex flag signalling had developed, and by the Han dynasty (200 BC–220 AD)
signallers had a choice of lights, flags, or gunshots to send signals.

At the core of all of those signals was **coding** strategy -- a number of rules
that both sides agreed upon in order to communicate. But the idea of encoding
*meaning* and sending it as a **signal** was realized even earlier -- probably
since the first controlled use of fire many of years ago...

[Information Theory part 4: Semaphores & signal fires](youtube://WrNDeYjcCJA)

[tag:Telegraphy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telegraphy)
is the long-distance transmission of messages where the sender uses symbolic
codes, known to the recipient, rather than a physical exchange of an object
bearing the message[^2].

belief state

the presence or absence of something allows to communicate **state**

signal torches give ability to **convey** information

message space (total number of possible messages)

symbols allow to show an arbitrary number of differences

combining symbols with multiple differences it is possible to convey more
messages

you can describe a message as a combination of several (yes/no) questions

given $n$ (yes/no) questions there are $2^n$ possible answers from a **decision
tree**

## Bacon's Cipher

Francis Bacon came up with a way to convey **all** letters of the alphabet using
a **single** difference with his bi-literal cipher

> "The transposition of two letters by five placings will be sufficient for 32
> differences. For by this art, a way is opened whereby a man may express and
> signify the intentions of his mind -- at any distance of place -- with objects
> which are capable of a two-fold difference only."
>
> -- [Francis Bacon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Bacon)

|           |           |           |             |           |           |
| :-------: | :-------: | :-------: | :---------: | :-------: | :-------: |
|     A     |     B     |     C     |      D      |     E     |     F     |
|   aaaaa   |  aaaa*b*  |  aaa*b*a  |   aaa*bb*   |  aa*b*aa  | aa*b*a*b* |
|     G     |     H     |     I     |      K      |     L     |     M     |
|  aa*bb*a  |  aa*bbb*  |  a*b*aaa  |  a*b*aa*b*  | a*b*a*b*a | a*b*a*bb* |
|     N     |     O     |     P     |      Q      |     R     |     S     |
|  a*bb*aa  | a*bb*a*b* |  a*bbb*a  |   a*bbbb*   |  *b*aaaa  | *b*aaa*b* |
|     T     |     U     |     W     |      X      |     Y     |     Z     |
| *b*aa*b*a | *b*aa*bb* | *b*a*b*aa | *b*a*b*a*b* | *b*a*bb*a | *b*a*bbb* |

<p style="text-align: center">
    <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bacon%27s_cipher" target="_blank">Bi-Literal Cipher</a>
</p>

<style>
    .table-wrapper em {
        font-style: initial;
        /* background-color: var(--primary-color); */
        /* color: white; */
        /* color: black; */
        border-bottom: 1px solid var(--primary-color);
        /* text-decoration: underline;
        text-decoration-thickness: 2px;
        text-decoration-color: var(--primary-complementary-color); */
    }

    .table-wrapper tbody tr:nth-child(even) {
        /* text-decoration: underline;
        text-decoration-thickness: 2px; */
        /* border-bottom: 2px solid var(--base-color); */
        /* background-color: var(--primary-color);
        color: black; */
    }
</style>

invention of a `tele` `graph`

#### References

[^1]: Wikipedia. [_Code_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code)

[^2]: Wikipedia. [_Telegraphy_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telegraphy)

[^Video 1]: Art of the Problem. _Information Theory part 3: What is coding theory?_
[tag.image/youtube:Open Playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLbg3ZX2pWlgKDVFNwn9B63UhYJVIerzHL)

[^Video 2]: Art of the Problem. _Information Theory part 4: Semaphores & signal fires_
[tag.image/youtube:Open Playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLbg3ZX2pWlgKDVFNwn9B63UhYJVIerzHL)
